This lecture follows on from the last one where we had a look at our numbered ACLs, both standard and
extended with a lab demo. In this lecture, we're going to configure a named ACL.
The scenario is that PC1 here is my administrator.
So I need to give them access to telnet to R2 at 10.0.0.2
but nobody else should have telnet access to the router.
And PC2 is my network and monitoring system and from there I need to be able to ping R2 to check
that it is still up and I don't want anybody else to be able to ping R2.
I want to hide a little bit for security reasons.
I'm going to be configuring this on R1 again.
And if you remember from the last lecture, we had a numbered standard ACL going outbound on fa0/0
that was blocking traffic from the 10.0.2.0 network going to R2. So that ACL,
I'll leave it there.
It's already blocking all traffic, including ping and telnet to R2 from the PCs.
So I just need to control my access from the 10.0.1.0 subnet.
I want to allow telnet traffic from PC1.
I want to allow ping traffic from PC2 going to R2 and block ping and telnet from everybody
else apart from those individual hosts and allow all traffic.
Now I've already got an ACL configured inbound on fa1/0 from the last lab exercise.
So let's remove that first.
So I'll go on to R1 and if I do a show run for interface fa1/0,
I can see there is my ip access-group 100 in.
So what I'll do is at global config,
I'll go interface fa1/0 and I'll say no and then I will copy and paste that line to remove
it.
Now doing that just removes the ACL from the interface.
The ACL was still there in the running config.
If I do a show run  and scroll down. You see there's still my
access-list 100 so it's still in the running config.
It's not doing anything right now because it's not actually applied on an interface.
Okay, so let's do this configuration.
So I'll go to global configuration and I'm going to do a named access-list here.
So the syntax is very similar, but a little bit different. For a numbered
access-list, the command starts with just access-list. For a named
access-list, it's ip access-list. So ip access-list, let's check the syntax.
I need to see whether it's standard or extended
ACL. Here,
I'm specifying who the source and destination is,
and the port number.
So I need to make this an extended ACL.
The next thing I do is give it a name.
This is going to be applied inbound on fa1/0 interface. So I'll give it a descriptive
name F1/0_in. That way anybody who is looking at ACL later is going to see where
this ACL was being applied just from the name of it.
OK, so I created the ACL and then you see the difference from a numbered
ACL. It just takes me to the ACL subcommand here. And now I can put in my access control entries.
So the first thing I wanted to do was permit TCP from the host 10.0.1.10.
That is PC1 going to host 10.0.0.2. That is R2 and I'm going to allow telnet traffic so
equals telnet.
I want to deny telnet from everybody else.
I'm already denying from the 10.0.2.0 subnet with my other ACL I've already configured.
So here I'll deny TCP from 10.0.1.0 subnet mask
0.0.0.255
going to host 10.0.0.2 equals telnet.
Now, I did it this way so I could show you configuring the subnet and a wildcard mask. Another way I
could have done it in which you would actually be better in the real world is permit TCP from any going
to host 10.0.0.2 equals telnet. Just in case
that later on, I have another subnet behind the router or on that side and I want to block it as well.
You can do it either way, whichever is going to make more sense when you're doing it in the real world.
OK, next one is the ping traffic.
So I'm going to permit. Now this is not TCP or UDP or IP. Ping is part of the ICMP suite, so I'm going
to permit ICMP.
It's coming from host 10.0.1.11 now going to host 10.0.0.2.
It's my router.
Let's check our options and you'll see they're for ping.
It is echo.
So, I will permit echoes from 10.0.1.11, and then I'm going to deny you from everybody else.
So deny
ICMP from subnet 10.0.1.0.
wildcard mask
0.0.0.255 going to host 10.0.0.2 and echo again.
OK, so I am allowing telnet from 10.0.1.10 PC1 to R2, blocking it from everywhere else,
and I'm allowing ping to R2 from PC2 at .11 and blocking it from everybody else.
Now at this point all of it's going to be allowed is just that telnet traffic from PC1 and the ping
traffic from PC2 because of the 'implicit deny any any' at the bottom of my ACL.
I don't want not here, I want to allow all other traffic.
So I also need to permit and it's all traffic.
So it's permit IP going from any going to any. That's my ACL done. As usual,
the thing that's easy to forget is to apply it to the interface.
So I remember to do that.
So it's interface fa1/0, ip access-group, and I named it. So scroll up to check.
And here we go, F1/0_in. I'll actually just copy and paste that in with
a right click and then I can do it either inbound or outbound.
Looking at our topology diagram, on fa1/0,
the traffic is going from the PCs going to R2.
So it's coming in on fa1/0.
It's going out on fa0/0.
So I'm applying it on fa1/0 here.
So the direction is going to be in.
OK, that is my ACL done. Now we need to check it.
So I will go on to PC1 and PC1 should be able to telnet to the router R2
at 10.0.0.2 and I'm getting the prompt so that is all good.
I'll break out there and I'll try pinging 10.0.0.2.
And this should feel like it was unreachable.
So that is all good.
And then I'll check it from PC2 and it should not be able to telnet to 10.0.0.2.
That's blocked.
That's good.
But should be able to ping to 10.0.0.2.
Also from here I should be ping my other subnet so I should check where PC3 was.
It's at 10.0.2.10 so let's ping there from one of my PCs.
Ping  10.0.2.10 and this is where it was important I remember to do that permit ip any any
at the bottom of the ACL.
If I had not put that in, this ping would fail. Because I did,
all our traffic is allowed, including this ping going to the other subnet.
I guess that was my ACL configuration done.
One last thing to show you is, actually I need to be on R1 for this, so that's going to R1. To
see what's going on with your ACLs,
you can do a show access-list. and there you can see all of my ACLs and you can see how many hits you're
getting on each of those different rules in the ACL as well.
Also, notice here that the access control entries have got an index number at the start that allows me to inject
other entries in between them if I need to later.
So where is my different ACLs?
I can see the configuration on them.
I can see how many packets have hit each of the different entries.
It's all good.
OK, so that was our configuration for Access Control
List.
I'll see you in the next lecture.